.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH CAPDB 1 "June 2026" "CapDB 3.54.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
capdb \- CapDB command-line interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B capdb
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ databasefile ]
.RI [ SQL ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B capdb
is the interactive and batch command-line front-end to
.BR CapDB ,
a hard fork of the SQLite database engine with optional connection pooling
and TLS remote access.
.PP
In interactive mode,
.B capdb
reads SQL and dot-commands, executes them against a database, and displays
results in several formats. In batch mode, SQL passed on the command line or
via standard input is executed and the process exits.
.PP
Local database files are opened by path. Remote databases use the
.B capdb://
URI scheme (see
.BR "REMOTE DATABASES" ).
.SH OPTIONS
Common options include:
.TP
.B \-batch
Run in batch mode (no interactive prompts).
.TP
.B \-init \fIFILE\fR
Read dot-commands from
.I FILE
before processing other input.
.TP
.B \-line
Set output mode to one column per line.
.TP
.B \-list
Set output mode to one row per line with column separators (default).
.TP
.B \-header
Turn column headers on.
.TP
.B \-noheader
Turn column headers off.
.TP
.B \-column
Set output mode to aligned columns.
.TP
.B \-csv
Set output mode to CSV.
.TP
.B \-json
Set output mode to JSON.
.TP
.B \-version
Print the CapDB library version and exit.
.TP
.B \-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.PP
Run
.B capdb \-help
for the full option list available in your build.
.SH INTERACTIVE USE
To open a local database:
.sp
$ \fBcapdb mydata.db\fR
.sp
Example session:
.sp
.nf
capdb> CREATE TABLE memos(text, priority INTEGER);
capdb> INSERT INTO memos VALUES('deliver project description', 10);
capdb> INSERT INTO memos VALUES('lunch with Christine', 100);
capdb> SELECT * FROM memos;
deliver project description|10
lunch with Christine|100
.fi
.sp
If no database file is named on the command line, use SQL
.B ATTACH
commands to open additional files in the same session.
.SH REMOTE DATABASES
When built with network support (\fBCAPDB_ENABLE_NETWORK\fR), the CLI accepts
\fBcapdb://\fR URIs as the database argument:
.sp
.nf
capdb 'capdb://HOST:PORT/path/to/db?token=SECRET&insecure=1'
.fi
.sp
Query parameters:
.TP
.B token=\fISTRING\fR
Shared-secret token (must match a line in the server's auth file).
.TP
.B user=\fINAME\fR \fBpassword=\fIPASS\fR
Alternative user/password authentication.
.TP
.B ca=\fIFILE\fR
PEM file for TLS certificate verification.
.TP
.B insecure=1
Disable TLS verification (development only; server must also run with
.B \-\-insecure\fR).
.PP
Default remote port is
.BR 5432 .
See
.BR capdb-server (1)
and
.BR ext/capdb/README.md .
.SH DOT-COMMANDS
Interactive meta-commands begin with a dot (.). Examples include
.BR .help ,
.BR .tables ,
.BR .schema ,
and
.BR .quit .
Run
.B .help
inside the shell for the complete list (options vary by build).
.SH INIT FILE
At startup the shell reads an initialization file for dot-commands and
settings, in this order:
.IP "1." 4
Default prompt and output settings.
.IP "2." 4
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/capdb/sqliterc\fR if
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is set, else
\fB~/.config/capdb/sqliterc\fR, else
\fB~/.sqliterc\fR.
.IP "3." 4
The file named by
.B \-init
if present.
.IP "4." 4
Remaining command-line options.
.SH HISTORY FILE
Interactive command history is stored in the file named by
.B CAPDB_HISTORY
if set; otherwise
\fB$XDG_STATE_HOME/capdb/history\fR,
\fB~/.local/state/capdb/history\fR,
or
\fB~/.sqlite_history\fR
as fallbacks.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CAPDB_HISTORY
Path to the interactive history file.
.TP
.B CAPDB_PS1
Override the main interactive prompt.
.TP
.B CAPDB_PS2
Override the continuation prompt.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base directory for
.BR capdb/sqliterc .
.TP
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
Base directory for history file location.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/capdb/sqliterc
User initialization file (preferred location).
.TP
.I ~/.sqliterc
Legacy initialization file fallback.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR capdb-server (1),
.BR capdb_pool (3),
.BR ext/capdb/README.md ,
.BR BUILD.md ,
.BR docs/CAPDB.md ,
https://sqlite.org/cli.html
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was derived from the upstream SQLite
.BR sqlite3 (1)
page and updated for CapDB.
Upstream authors include Andreas Rottmann, Bill Bumgarner, and Laszlo
Boszormenyi; CapDB fork maintenance by the CapDB project.
