.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH CAPDB-SERVER 1 "June 2026" "CapDB 3.54.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
capdb-server \- CapDB TLS SQL server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B capdb-server
[\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B capdb-server
accepts client connections over TLS (or plain TCP in insecure mode),
authenticates them, and executes SQL against database files under a
configured root directory. In legacy storage mode, each database path uses a
.BR capdb_pool (3)
connection pool on the server side. In volume storage mode, database paths
resolve to CapDB volumes under
.BR \-\-volume-root .
.PP
Clients connect with the
.B capdb://
URI scheme using
.BR capdb (1)
or
.BR libcapdb_client .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-listen \fIADDR:PORT\fR
Address and port to bind. Default:
.BR 0.0.0.0:5432 .
.TP
.B \-\-cert \fIFILE\fR
Server TLS certificate (PEM). Required unless
.B \-\-insecure
is set.
.TP
.B \-\-key \fIFILE\fR
Server TLS private key (PEM). Required unless
.B \-\-insecure
is set.
.TP
.B \-\-ca \fIFILE\fR
Optional client CA bundle for mutual TLS.
.TP
.B \-\-auth-file \fIFILE\fR
Authentication file (required). One token per line, or
.I user:password
lines. Secrets may be stored literally or as
.I sha256:<64-hex-digest>
for token entries and
.I user:sha256:<64-hex-digest>
for password entries.
.TP
.B \-\-db-root \fIDIR\fR
Required jail directory for legacy storage; all opened database paths must
resolve under this directory.
.TP
.B \-\-storage \fIMODE\fR
Storage backend:
.B legacy
(default) or
.BR volume .
.TP
.B \-\-volume-root \fIDIR\fR
Required when
.B \-\-storage volume
is selected. Volumes are resolved under this root.
.TP
.B \-\-role \fIROLE\fR
Cluster role:
.B primary
(default) or
.BR replica .
.TP
.B \-\-sync-replication
For primary volume storage, wait for replica acknowledgement after commits
before reporting success.
.TP
.B \-\-rep-listen \fIADDR:PORT\fR
Replication listener address for a primary. Requires
.BR \-\-rep-token .
.TP
.B \-\-rep-primary \fIHOST:PORT\fR
Upstream primary replication endpoint for a replica role.
.TP
.B \-\-rep-token \fITOKEN\fR
Shared replication authentication token. Required with
.B \-\-rep-listen
and for replica connections to an upstream primary.
.TP
.B \-\-pool-min \fIN\fR
Minimum connections per pool (default 1).
.TP
.B \-\-pool-max \fIN\fR
Maximum connections per pool (default 8).
.TP
.B \-\-max-clients \fIN\fR
Maximum concurrent client sessions (default 256).
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Suppress audit logging.
.TP
.B \-\-insecure
Disable TLS (development only). Clients must pass
.B insecure=1
in the URI.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH EXAMPLE
.sp
.nf
capdb-server \\
  \-\-listen 127.0.0.1:5432 \\
  \-\-cert server.pem \-\-key server.key \\
  \-\-auth-file /etc/capdb/tokens.txt \\
  \-\-db-root /var/lib/capdb/databases
.fi
.sp
Volume primary with replication listener:
.sp
.nf
capdb-server \\
  \-\-storage volume \\
  \-\-volume-root /var/lib/capdb/volumes \\
  \-\-auth-file /etc/capdb/tokens.txt \\
  \-\-cert server.pem \-\-key server.key \\
  \-\-rep-listen 0.0.0.0:5433 \\
  \-\-rep-token SECRET
.fi
.sp
Volume replica:
.sp
.nf
capdb-server \\
  \-\-storage volume \\
  \-\-volume-root /var/lib/capdb/replica \\
  \-\-role replica \\
  \-\-rep-primary primary.example:5433 \\
  \-\-rep-token SECRET \\
  \-\-auth-file /etc/capdb/tokens.txt \\
  \-\-cert server.pem \-\-key server.key
.fi
.sp
Development (no TLS):
.sp
.nf
capdb-server \\
  \-\-listen 127.0.0.1:5432 \\
  \-\-auth-file ./tokens.txt \\
  \-\-db-root ./data \\
  \-\-insecure
.fi
.sp
Client:
.sp
.nf
capdb 'capdb://127.0.0.1:5432/app.db?token=SECRET&insecure=1'
.fi
.SH SIGNALS
On
.B SIGINT
or
.B SIGTERM
the server stops accepting new connections and shuts down gracefully.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/capdb/tokens.txt
Typical auth-file location (site-specific).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR capdb (1),
.BR capdbtest (1),
.BR ext/capdb/README.md ,
.BR ext/pool/README.md ,
.BR BUILD.md
.SH AUTHOR
CapDB project.
