.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH CAPDB-CTL 1 "July 2026" "CapDB 3.6.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
capdb-ctl \- CapDB volume and cluster administration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B capdb-ctl
.I command
[\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B capdb-ctl
performs local administration against CapDB volume directories. It does not
contact a running server; commands operate on the
.B --volume
path directly.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B status --volume \fIPATH\fR [--json]
Print local volume status including role, generation, LSN, applied LSN, and
lag bytes.
.TP
.B prepare --volume \fIPATH\fR
Create or initialize a local CapDB volume directory.
.TP
.B health --volume \fIPATH\fR [--json]
Check local volume readiness. Returns zero when the volume can be read and
non-zero when it cannot.
.TP
.B metrics --volume \fIPATH\fR
Print Prometheus-style local volume metrics for LSN, applied LSN, lag bytes,
and generation.
.TP
.B promote --volume \fIPATH\fR [--wait \fIMS\fR]
Replay available replication segments, optionally wait for applied LSN to catch
up, and increment the volume generation. External fencing is required before
promoting a replica.
.TP
.B demote --volume \fIPATH\fR
Mark the local volume role as demoted. This is a local state change; external
traffic fencing is still required.
.TP
.B backup --volume \fIPATH\fR --out \fIFILE.db\fR
Export the volume database to a standalone database file.
.TP
.B export --volume \fIPATH\fR --out \fIFILE.db\fR
Alias for
.BR backup .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --volume \fIPATH\fR
Volume directory to inspect or administer.
.TP
.B --out \fIFILE.db\fR
Output database file for
.B backup
or
.BR export .
.TP
.B --wait \fIMS\fR
Maximum milliseconds for
.B promote
to wait for replay/applied LSN catch-up before returning busy.
.TP
.B --json
Emit machine-readable JSON for
.B status
or
.BR health .
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
capdb-ctl prepare --volume /var/lib/capdb/volumes/app
capdb-ctl status --volume /var/lib/capdb/volumes/app --json
capdb-ctl health --volume /var/lib/capdb/volumes/app --json
capdb-ctl metrics --volume /var/lib/capdb/volumes/app
capdb-ctl backup --volume /var/lib/capdb/volumes/app --out /backup/app.db
capdb-ctl promote --volume /var/lib/capdb/volumes/app --wait 30000
capdb-ctl demote --volume /var/lib/capdb/volumes/app
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR capdb-server (1),
.BR capdb (1)
.SH AUTHOR
CapDB project.
